# What is surface area to volume ratio, and why aren’t we allowed nice things? (Like giant insects)

One principle that shows up a lot in biology that isn’t specifically a biological concept, is the idea of surface area to volume ratio. Broadly speaking, this describes how much of something, whether it’s an organelle, a cell membrane, a tissue layer or some sort of desert fox, is exposed to its outer environment, relative to how much space it occupies. Larger, smoother objects and structures tend to have a smaller surface area to volume ratio than smaller, more irregular objects and structures. 

The reason that larger objects have a smaller surface area relative to volume than small ones is due to a principle known as the square cube law. The gist of it is that, as an object gets bigger, its volume grows faster than its surface area proportionally. Imagine a cube that’s a metre each side. The surface area of that cube is $6 m^{2}$ while the volume is only $1 m^3$, making the surface area to volume ratio  = 6. If the size of the edges of the cube are doubled, so it’s $2\times 2\times 2 m$, the surface area becomes $24 m^2$ and the volume becomes $8 m^3$, the ratio is now only 3. This ratio continues to reduce as the volume of, in this case, the cube. The same principle applies to cells, organs and even entire organisms.

The reason this is relevant to biology is because the surface area of a thing affects how it interacts with its environment. This is mainly in relation to exchange between one surface and another. A higher surface area to volume ratio results in faster exchange, while a lower one slows down exchange.

The square cube law is the reason why properly giant insects don’t exist. The gas exchange system of most insects is based on pores in the surface of their exoskeleton. Since oxygen enters the insect’s body through passive diffusion, a large surface area to volume ratio is required to maintain a rapid enough rate of diffusion to supply them with sufficient oxygen for respiration. Due to the square-cube law, as the body size of an insect gets larger, the surface area to volume ratio gets smaller, limiting the effectiveness of this ventilation system and eventually placing a cap on the maximum size able to be attained by any insect in the modern atmosphere.

The small intestine has a folded surface covered in villi, finger-shaped projections in the intestinal wall and microvilli, similar structures but on a cellular level, serve to increase the surface area of the small intestine, to increase the rate of transfer of glucose and other nutrients into the bloodstream.

Thermal exchange surfaces are also subject to this same principle, there’s a few species of desert fox that have large ears, containing many capillaries, to maximise heat exchange with the environment, this prevents them from overheating as their larger surface area to volume ratio increases the rate at which they lose heat to their environment.

Usually, if an exam asks you to comment on the structure of an adaptation, or a cell that has a large number of wrinkles in it, or folds or projections like villi, there will be some relevance to talking about its large surface area to volume ratio, this principle is found all over biology and is a relatively common topic in both edexcel and aqa papers.
